.fp 5 CW
.de Af
.ds ;G \\*(;G\\f\\$1\\$3\\f\\$2
.if !\\$4 .Af \\$2 \\$1 "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6" "\\$7" "\\$8" "\\$9"
..
.de aF
.ie \\$3 .ft \\$1
.el \{\
.ds ;G \&
.nr ;G \\n(.f
.Af "\\$1" "\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6" "\\$7" "\\$8" "\\$9"
\\*(;G
.ft \\n(;G \}
..
.de L
.aF 5 \\n(.f "\\$1" "\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6" "\\$7"
..
.de LR
.aF 5 1 "\\$1" "\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6" "\\$7"
..
.de RL
.aF 1 5 "\\$1" "\\$2" "\\$3" "\\$4" "\\$5" "\\$6" "\\$7"
..
.de EX		\" start example
.ta 1i 2i 3i 4i 5i 6i
.PP
.RS 
.PD 0
.ft 5
.nf
..
.de EE		\" end example
.fi
.ft
.PD
.RE
.PP
..
.TH SPAWNVEG 3
.SH NAME
spawnveg \- process spawn with process group and session control
.SH SYNOPSIS
.L "#include <ast.h>"
.sp
.L "int spawnveg(const char* command, char** argv, char** envv, pid_t pgid, int tcfd);"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.L spawnveg
combines
.IR fork (2),
.IR exec (2),
.IR setpgid (2)
and
.IR setsid (2)
into a single call.
If one of either
.IR posix_spawn (3)
or
.IR vfork (2)
is available, those functions are preferred over
.IR fork .
.PP
.LR command ,
.L argv
and
.L envv
are as in
.IR execve (2).
.L pgid
controls the new process group and session:
.TP
.L -1
The new process becomes a session leader.
It is called in the child context.
.TP
.L 0
The new process is in the callers process group.
.TP
.L 1
The new process becomes a process group leader.
.TP
.L >1
The new process joins the process group
.IR pgid .
.PP
The
.L tcfd
argument is currently only used if the operating system supports the
.I posix_spawn_file_actions_addtcsetpgrp_np
function.
When
.L tcfd
is
.LR >=0 ,
spawnveg will set the controlling terminal for the new process to
.IR tcfd .
.SH CAVEATS
If the
.I posix_spawn_file_actions_addtcsetpgrp_np
function is not available, then
.L spawnveg
cannot reliably set the terminal process group.
As a result, it is incompatible with job control when used with terminals.
Additionally, if the
.L POSIX_SPAWN_SETSID
attribute is not supported, then
.L spawnveg
cannot make the new process a session leader when using the
.I posix_spawn
API.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
fork(2), vfork(2), posix_spawn(3), exec(2), setpgid(2), setsid(2), spawnve(2)
