.fp 5 CW
.TH STAK 3
.SH NAME
\fBstak\fR \- data stack storage library (obsolete: use \fBstk\fR instead)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ta .75i 1.5i 2.25i 3i 3.75i 4.5i 5.25i 6i
.PP
.nf
\f3
#include <stak.h>

Stak_t *stakcreate(int \fIflags\fP);
Stak_t *stakinstall(Stak_t *\fIstack\fP, char *(\fIoverflow\fP)(size_t));
int stakdelete(Stak_t *\fIstack\fP);
unsigned int staklink(Stak_t *\fIstack\fP)

char *stakalloc(unsigned \fIsize\fP);
char *stakcopy(const char *\fIstring\fP);
char *stakset(char *\fIaddress\fP, unsigned \fIoffset\fP);

char *stakseek(unsigned \fIoffset\fP);
int stakputc(int \fIc\fP);
int stakputs(const char *\fIstring\fP);
int stakwrite(const char *\fIaddress\fP, unsigned \fIsize\fP);
int staktell(void);
char *stakptr(unsigned \fIoffset\fP);
char *stakfreeze(unsigned \fIextra\fP);
\fR
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
(This interface is obsolete; it is now simply a set of macros
that translate these calls into \f3stk\fP(3) and \f3sfio\fP(3) calls
using \f3stkstd\fP.
The following description should continue to apply to the old calls.)
.PP
\f3stak\fP is a package of routines designed to provide efficient
stack oriented dynamic storage.
A stack abstraction consists of an ordered list of contiguous
memory regions, called stack frames, that can hold objects of
arbitrary size.
A stack is represented by the type \f3Stak_t\fP
defined in header \f3<stak.h>\fP.
.PP
At any instant there is one active stack.
Variable size objects can be
added to the active stack
and programs can reference these objects directly with pointers.
.PP
In addition, the last object on the stack
(referred to here as the current object)
can be built incrementally.
The current object has an associated offset that determines its
current size.
While the current object is being built incrementally,
its location might
change so that it is necessary to reference the object with
relative offsets ranging from zero to the current offset of the object.
.PP
There is a preset initial active stack.
To use an additional stack, it is necessary to create it and to
install it as the active stack.
.PP
A stack is created with the \f3stakcreate\fP() function.
The \fIflags\fP argument is an options bitmask.
If the \f3STAK_SMALL\fP bit is set, the stack allocates memory in
small blocks, optimizing for memory usage at the expense of performance.
If successful,
\f3stakcreate\fP() returns a pointer to a stack whose reference
count is 1.
Otherwise, \f3stakcreate\fP() returns a null pointer.
.PP
The \f3staklink\fP() function increases the reference count for the
given \fIstack\fP and returns the increased count.
.PP
The \f3stakinstall\fP() function
makes the specified \fIstack\fP the active stack and returns a pointer
to the previous active stack.
When the \fIoverflow\fP argument is not null,
it specifies a function that will
be called whenever \f3malloc\fP(3) fails while trying to grow the
stack.
The \fIoverflow\fP function will be called with the size that was passed
to \f3malloc\fP(3).
The \fIoverflow\fP function can call \f3exit\fP(3), call \f3longjmp\fP(3)
or return.
If the \f3overflow\fP function returns,
it must return a pointer to a memory region of the given size.
The default action is to write an error to standard error and to
call \f3exit\fP(2) with a non-zero exit value.
When \fIstack\fP is a null pointer,
the active stack is not changed
but the \fIoverflow\fP function for the active stack can be changed
and a pointer to the active stack is returned.
.PP
The \f3stakdelete\fP() function decrements the reference count and
frees the memory associated with
the specified stack
when the reference count is zero.
The effect of subsequent references to objects
on the stack are undefined.
.PP
The
\f3stakalloc\fP() function returns an aligned pointer to space on the
active stack that can be used to hold any object of the given \fIsize\fP.
\f3stakalloc\fP() is similar to \f3malloc\fP(3) except that individual
items returned by \f3stakalloc\fP() can not be freed.
\f3stakalloc\fP() causes the offset of the current object to be set to
zero.
.PP
The
\f3stakcopy\fP() function copies the given string onto the stack
and returns a pointer to the \fIstring\fP on the stack.
\f3stakcopy\fP() causes the offset of the current object to be set to
zero.
.PP
The \f3stakset\fP() function finds the frame containing the given
\fIaddress\fP, frees all frames that were created after the one containing
the given \fIaddress\fP, and sets the current object to the given
\fIaddress\fP.
The top of the current object is set to \fIoffset\fP bytes from
current object.
If \fIaddress\fP is null, the stack is reset to the beginning.
If it is non-null, but is not the address of an object on the
stack, the program aborts and dumps core.
.PP
The remaining functions are used to build the current object incrementally.
An object that is built incrementally on the stack will
always occupy contiguous memory within a stack frame but
until \f3stakfreeze\fP() is called,
the location in memory for the object can change.
There is a current offset associated with the current object that
determines where subsequent operations apply.
Initially, this offset is zero, and the offset changes as a result
of the operations you specify.
.PP
The \f3stakseek\fP() function is used set the offset for the
current object.
The \fIoffset\fP argument to \f3stakseek\fP() specifies the new
offset for the current object.
The frame will be extended or moved
if \f3offset\fP causes the new current offset to extend beyond the
current frame.
\f3stakseek\fP() returns a pointer to the beginning of the current object.
.PP
The \f3staktell\fP() function gives the offset of the current object.
.PP
The \f3stakputc\fP() function adds a given character to the current object
on the stack.
The current offset is advanced by 1.
.PP
The \f3stakputs\fP() function appends the given \fIstring\fP onto the current
object in the stack and returns the length of the string.
The current offset is advanced by the length of the string.
.PP
The \f3stakwrite\fP() function appends the given \fIsize\fP byte memory
region starting at \fIaddress\fP onto the current
object in the stack and advances the current offset by \fIsize\fP.
The current offset is returned.
.PP
The \f3stakptr\fP() function converts the given \f3offset\fP
for the current object into a memory address on the stack.
This address is only valid until another stack operation is given.
The result is not defined if \fIoffset\fP exceeds the size of the current
object.
.PP
The \f3stakfreeze\fP()
function terminates the current object on the
stack and returns a pointer to the beginning of this object.
If \fIextra\fP is non-zero, \fIextra\fP bytes are added to the stack
before the current object is terminated.  The first added byte will
contain zero and the contents of the remaining bytes are undefined.
.SH HISTORY
The
\f3stak\fP
interface was derived from similar routines in the KornShell code
that is used for building parse trees and carrying out expansions.
It provides an efficient mechanism for grouping dynamically allocated
objects so that they can be freed all at once rather than individually.
.SH AUTHOR
 David Korn
.SH SEE ALSO
\f3exit(2)\fP
\f3longjmp(3)\fP
\f3malloc(3)\fP
